[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
naga manchetti and
charlie state our headlines today paying
for the pandemic the chancellor delivers
a budget that will take the uk's tax
burden
to its highest level since the 1960s
but it's a buy now pay later budget with
uk
debt soaring i'm in the northeast where
fresh investment has been welcomed but
there's
worry about who will pay long term a
question we'll put to the chancellor
the duchess of sussex accuses the royal
family of perpetuating falsehoods about
her
and prince harry i don't know
how they could expect that after all of
this time
we would still just be silent if there
is an active role
that the firm is playing in perpetuating
falsehoods about us this latest extract
from the u.s television interview with
oprah winfrey
comes as the palace investigates claims
that the duchess bullied royal staff
good morning england are in a spin again
they have to win this final test against
india to avoid losing the series
but on the first morning they're in
trouble once more
oh whoa whoa whoa oh my god
there you go a dramatic moment an
unmanned spacex rocket explodes after a
test flight
good morning it's another chilly start
to the day chilly day generally
with a fair bit of cloud around some
dense fog this morning across some
southern areas and we've got some rain
in the forecast
too i'll tell you where later in the
programme
[Music]
good morning it's thursday the 4th of
march our top story is that rishi sunak
has defended his plans to raise
overall taxation to the highest level
since the 1960s saying that no
chancellor since
has had to deal with a pandemic
yesterday he sent out plans in the
budget to begin repairing the nation's
finances post coronavirus
but labour leader sikhiya stamina says
he's just papering over the cracks
paul hawkins has this report
billed as a budget to rescue an economy
ravaged by kovi
can the country
the chancellor has promised to protect
jobs the tax increases loom
taking the uk's tax burden to its
highest level since the 1960s according
to the office for budget responsibility
obviously the pandemic has dealt us
pretty bad damage to the public finances
in the economy and i think
i and the government have a
responsibility to put those on back in a
strong position over time but do that in
a way
that is supportive of our economic
recovery
in the short term but also do so in a
way that is fair
this is how he intends to do it the
furlough scheme is to be extended until
the end of september
as will higher universal credit payments
the headline rate of corporation tax
will go up from 19
to 25 from 2023 though smaller firms
will be exempt
and a freeze on income tax thresholds is
expected to lead to 1.3 million more
people paying
income tax plus a million more paying at
the higher rate
but there'll be some more help for
hospitality pubs won't have to pay
business rates until the end of june
we have been open for four months out of
the last 12 when we get to reopen
when were reopened it's going to be
gardens only and then restricted inside
so we're going to need all the help we
can get to get hospitality through
labour talk of a missed opportunity so i
just think this didn't deliver
the scale of what was required and for
most people what they're going to see
is a very big increase in council tax
possibly a universal
credit cut and a very high level of
unemployment no matter where they live
although much of the focus has been on
business some number crunchers say the
effects of the budget
will also be felt far wider much less
attention was paid
to what's happening to british
households and in many ways the year
ahead for them
is more difficult than the year we've
been through with falling
living standards even while the economy
was
this autumn and actually for public
services too further cuts to public
spending mean that we may be seeing what
feels a lot like austerity
there is now a route out of lockdown but
tough times ahead
the chancellor says not all his
decisions will be popular but they are
he insists honest paul hawkins
bbc news let's get more now from our
chief political correspondent adam
fleming joining us from westminster
morning to you adam just give us a sense
of
the i mean the scale of what's being
outlined is huge in terms of both
the spending but also in terms of one
day the tax that has to be recouped
yeah and the chancellor has basically
got three episodes in this budget the
first episode is continuing the massive
massive support for people and
businesses during the pandemic
keeping that going until september then
the second phase is trying to boost the
economy by giving a massive
massive tax break to businesses that
invest
and then step three is increasing the
tax on company profits that we're just
hearing about
and increasing the tax on the most of
the rest of us
by freezing those thresholds for the
different rates of income tax which
means that more people
will start paying income tax and more
people will end up paying
the higher rate of income tax now
this is all shrouded in uncertainty
because we don't really know
how the economy is going to behave over
the next few years
it's a guess we don't really know how
the virus is going to behave
over the next few years and how will
conservative mps behave
in the next few years they're okay with
tax increases
at the moment but will they be okay with
the highest tax burden since the 1960s
when it
actually exists in a couple of years
time enough for the moment thank you
thank you
nina's going to be talking to the
chancellor rishi sunak at half past 7 so
we'll have more on that
the duchess of sussex says she's not
afraid of the consequences of speaking
out in
her and harry's interview with oprah
winfrey saying a lot has been lost
already a second extract for the from
the heavily anticipated interview has
been released overnight in which megan
said that she could not be expected to
stay silent
if the royal family played a part in
perpetuating falsehoods about the couple
it comes as buckingham palace launches
an investigation into claims the duchess
bullied former royal staff
simon jones has more
megan is making it clear she will not be
afraid to speak out
in a second trailer for the interview
released overnight
how do you feel about the palace hearing
you speak your truth today
i don't know how they could expect
that after all of this time we would
still just be silent
if there is an active role that the firm
is playing
in perpetuating falsehoods about us and
if that comes with risk of losing things
i mean i've
there's a lot that's been lost already
this is a second clip released by cbs
but the first in which we've heard the
duchess speak
the interview was recorded before
buckingham palace began an investigation
into claims megan had bullied former
royal staff
the times newspaper has obtained an
email written in late 2018 by jason
knorth the couple's communications
secretary to simon case
he's now the cabinet secretary in it mr
knorf is reported to have written
i am very concerned that the duchess was
able to bully two pas out of the
household in the past year
the treatment of x was totally
unacceptable
buckingham palace said it was very
concerned about the allegations
former members of staff will be invited
to participate in its investigation
in a statement it added the royal
household has had a dignity at work
policy in place for a number of years
and does not and will not tolerate
bullying or harassment in the workplace
but a spokesperson for megan said the
duchess is saddened by this latest
attack on her character
particularly as someone who has been the
target of bullying herself
she will keep striving to set an example
for doing what is right
and good but the latest interview clip
will do little to heal any apparent
rifts between the sussexes and the
palace
simon jones bbc news
scotland's first minister nicola
sturgeon has insisted she had no motive
intention
or desire to get her predecessor alex
salmond
giving evidence to the inquiry into her
government's handling of harassment
allegations against mr salmon she
described claims of a plot against him
as
absurd our political correspondent nick
erdley has this report
after months of allegations yesterday
nicola sturgeon had her chance
to make her case i solemnly sincerely
and
truly declare and affirm that i will
tell the truth
the whole truth and nothing but the
truth scotland's first minister
insists she followed the rules that her
government was right to investigate alex
salmond
and that there was no plot to take him
down alex almond
has been for most of my life since i was
about 20
21 years old not just a very close
political colleague
a friend in my younger day somebody i
looked up to and revered
you know i had no motive intention
desire
to get alexander this was a marathon
session more than seven hours of
questioning
ms sturgeon apologized to women who were
let down by the government
but she insisted all the decisions she
made were for the right reasons
i have never claimed in this or anything
else to be infallible
i have searched my soul on all of this
many many times over
it may very well be that i didn't get
everything right that's for others to
judge
but in one of the most invidious
political and personal situations i have
ever faced
i believe i acted properly and
appropriately and
overall i made the best judgments i
could
this row isn't over though there could
be more claims to come
and a report on whether ms sturgeon
broke the rules ministers have to follow
is expected this month
nick earley bbc news hollywood
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest
with bbc news